CALL IN TRANSACTIONS on composite databases (#896)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/subqueries/subqueries-in-transactions.adoc

1+d|Rows: 2

|===

[[composite-databases]]
== Composite databases

> `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` works on composite databases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` can be used on composite databases.
```

Reviewer: should we link out to documentation on composite databases here?

Author: Yes, I guess we should link composite doc

> Composite databases are virtual databases used for querying their constituents, so the examples above are generally
> valid for composite databases, but they must be slightly modified to accommodate the nature of composite databases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Composite databases are virtual databases used for querying their constituents.
The examples above are generally valid for composite databases, but they must be slightly modified to accommodate the nature of composite databases.
```

Author: This suggestion was committed. I don't know why it is not shown as so here.

> modified to accommodate the nature of composite databases.

Reviewer 3: Don't break individual sentences across different lines. This applies throughout the whole PR (and whole docs really: we don't have anything like an 80 or 100 char cap).

Author: Sure. It is my software engineer nature to do it :)

> The following two examples shows how `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` can be used on a composite database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following two examples show how `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` can be used on a composite database.
```

Author: 👍

> The following two examples shows how `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` can be used on a composite database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following two examples show how you can use `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` on a composite database.
```

Author: I have included the suggestion, but I was not able to commit it form GitHub

> Both examples are the equivalent of examples presented in the previous sections, but modified for composite databases.
> The first query uses 'friends.csv' from previous examples and creates the person nodes on all constituents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first query processes the file _friends.csv_ and creates `Person` nodes on all constituents.
```

.friends.csv

> [source, csv, role="noheader" filename="friends.csv"]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source, csv, filename="friends.csv"]
```
`noheader` doesn't do anything anymore

----
1,Bill,26
2,Max,27
3,Anna,22
4,Gladys,29
5,Summer,24
----

> .Query

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Create `Person` nodes on all constituents, drawing data from friends.csv 
```
Feel free to take or not this suggestion. I like the description of examples to be as close to the examples as possible. It also frees us from the non descriptive `Query` titles.
Same for the next one.
If you take this, remove line 562.

> [source, cypher]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source, cypher, test-skip]
```
We don't have the infrastructure to test composite db functions. Same below.

----
UNWIND graph.names() AS graphName
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///friends.csv' AS line
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  WITH line
  CREATE (:Person {name: line[1], age: toInteger(line[2])})
} IN TRANSACTIONS
----

The second query removes all nodes from all constituents.

> .Query

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Remove all nodes from all constituents
```
Same: if applied, remove line 586.

> [source, cypher]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source, cypher, test-skip]
```

----
UNWIND graph.names() AS graphName
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  MATCH (n)
  RETURN id(n) AS id
}
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  WITH id
  MATCH (n)
  WHERE id(n) = id
  DETACH DELETE n
} IN TRANSACTIONS
----

The two examples demonstrate another useful feature of `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS`.
Even though composite databases allow accessing multiple graphs in a single query, only
one graph can be modified in a single transaction.

> `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` offers a way of constructing queries which modify multiple graphs.

Reviewer 3: I was very puzzled as to why the double invocation of `CALL` to delete, and then I saw your comment which clarifies. I don't think it's fair to assume the reader will understand without clarification, so I feel like we should explain _why_ you have to do this gymnastics and your first-thought-solution wouldn't work well.
Also, any special reason for using `id` rather than `elementId`?

Author: > Also, any special reason for using id rather than elementId?
good catch. It should use elementId

Author: >I was very puzzled as to why the double invocation of CALL to delete, and then I saw your comment which clarifies. I don't think it's fair to assume the reader will understand without clarification, so I feel like we should explain why you have to do this gymnastics and your first-thought-solution wouldn't work well.

I agree. But I think this might not be the best place. This is not behaviour specific to composite. 
The reason for the first CALL is the same why one of the  non-composite example looks like this:
```
MATCH (n)
CALL {
  WITH n
  DETACH DELETE n
} IN TRANSACTIONS
```
If you put the MATCH inside the CALL, it will be all one batch. It is something I personally did not understand. When I first used CALL IN TX. I thought the batching is driven by the rows produced in the CALL not rows coming in the CALL.

Author: OK. The doc actually says so if you read carefully "The number of input rows is set with the modifier `OF n ROWS` (or `OF n ROW`)."

Reviewer 2: i agree, a short clarification (or a link?) may facilitate understanding the example

Author: I have added a note explaining why the nodes are matched outside the CALL IN TX. I have also added an equivalent note to the non-composite example. I feel that if this example needs an explanation, so does the non-composite one. Please have a look if you like the formulation.

> offers a way how to construct queries modifying multiple graphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
offers a way to construct queries modifying multiple graphs.
```

> offers a way how to construct queries modifying multiple graphs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though composite databases allow accessing multiple graphs in a single query, only one graph can be modified in a single transaction.
`CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` offers a way of constructing queries which modify multiple graphs.
```

Author: Good suggestion. I can't commit it on GitHub as there is probably some ind of conflict with the other suggestions. I will include it.

> offers a way how to construct queries modifying multiple graphs.

Reviewer 2: does the double "CALL" represent the way of constructing such queries?

Author: Do you mean 
```
UNWIND graph.names() AS graphName
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  MATCH (n)
  RETURN id(n) AS id
}
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  WITH id
  MATCH (n)
  WHERE id(n) = id
  DETACH DELETE n
} IN TRANSACTIONS
```
by the double call?
If yes the reason why we have to write it like that is that 

```
UNWIND graph.names() AS graphName
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  MATCH (n)
  DETACH DELETE n
} IN TRANSACTIONS
```

would not do the trick as it is the input into the CALL IN TX that is batched and here the input is one row per constituent, which would mean deleting all the nodes in a single batch which would blow up the memory on any larger graph.

[[composite-databases-batching]]
=== Batch size in composite databases

> Since queries on composite databases can interact with more than one graph, batching is slightly more complicated there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since queries on composite databases can interact with more than one graph, batching is slightly more complicated.
```

> Since queries on composite databases can interact with more than one graph, batching is slightly more complicated there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since queries on composite databases can interact with more than one graph, batching behaves differently.
```

Author: I don't like the word "differently". The declared batch size is an upper limit on non-composite databases, too. If you declare batch size `x`, it does not mean that it is always going to be `x`. For example, if you have batch size of 2 and there are 5 input rows, the last batch will be 1.

Reviewer 2: ok, how about "complex" instead of "complicated"?

Author: done

> The batch size declared with  `IN TRANSACTIONS OF ... ROWS` represents an upper limit of the batch size. The real batch size
> depends on the evaluation of `USE` clause. Calls targeting different graphs can't be interleaved so if a `USE` clause
> evaluates to a different target than the current one, the batch is committed and a new one started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The batch size declared with  `IN TRANSACTIONS OF ... ROWS` represents an upper limit of the batch size.
The real batch size depends on the evaluation of the `USE` clause.
Calls targeting different graphs can't be interleaved so if a `USE` clause evaluates to a different target than the current one, the batch is committed and the next batch is created.
```

> This is demonstrated in the following example. It assumes existence of two constituents 'remoteGraph1' and 'remoteGraph2'
> of composite database called 'composite'.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next example assumes the existence of two constituents 'remoteGraph1' and 'remoteGraph2' for the composite database 'composite'.
The declared batch size is 3, but the evaluation of the `USE` clause causes the batch size to be 2 on 'composite.remoteGraph1', followed by 3 on 'composite.remoteGraph2', followed by 1 on 'composite.remoteGraph2' and finally 2 on 'composite.remoteGraph1'.
```

The declared batch size is 3, but the evaluation of the `USE` clause causes the batch size to be 2 on 'composite.remoteGraph1',

> followed by 3 on 'composite.remoteGraph2', followed by 1 on 'composite.remoteGraph2' and finally 2 on 'composite.remoteGraph1'.

Reviewer 3: I recommend backticks for all db names.

Author: 👍

.Query

> [source, cypher]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source, cypher, test-skip]
```

UNWIND [0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0] AS i
WITH graphs[i] AS g
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( g )
  CREATE ()

> } IN TRANSACTIONS OF 3 ROW

Reviewer: ```suggestion
} IN TRANSACTIONS OF 3 ROWS
```

----
The declared batch size is 3, but the evaluation of USE clause will cause the batch size to be 2 on 'composite.remoteGraph1',

> followed by 3 on 'composite.remoteGraph2', followed by 1 on 'composite.remoteGraph2' and finally 2 on 'composite.remoteGraph1'.

Reviewer: Do we want to comment here that if there's an error during execution, the part of the error message that says "(Transactions committed: 0)" should be ignored/is not accurate

Author: Good point. I guess we mention it as a current limitation.

Reviewer: Where do current limitations live?

Author: Currently nowhere :) .

Maybe let's add it as a note?
```
[NOTE]
====
There is a currently a known issue.
When an error occurs during CALL In Transaction processing, the error message includes the information about how many transaction have been committed.
The number of reported committed transaction is always 0 in error messages on composite databases.
====
```

Author: @htsedebenham @rsill-neo4j what do you think?

Reviewer: ```
[NOTE]
====
There is a currently a known issue.
When an error occurs during CALL In Transaction processing, the error message includes information about how many transactions have been committed.
Errors on composite databases always report "(Transactions committed: 0)".
====
```

Reviewer: May as well let SEO try and direct here 😅

Reviewer 3: What's the ETA to fixing this? Is there a card to which removing this note has been noted down, so that that admonition doesn't say longer than necessary? Or is the issue planned to stay longer term?

Author: It will stay like that a couple of releases. Runtime team will start working on a better implementation soon that will not have this limitation. I will ask them to include a task to remove this note in the related Trello cards.

> The declared batch size is 3, but the evaluation of USE clause will cause the batch size to be 2 on 'composite.remoteGraph1',
> followed by 3 on 'composite.remoteGraph2', followed by 1 on 'composite.remoteGraph2' and finally 2 on 'composite.remoteGraph1'.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
(moved)

The following two examples show how you can use `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` on a composite database.

.friends.csv
[source, csv, filename="friends.csv"]
----
1,Bill,26
2,Max,27
3,Anna,22
4,Gladys,29
5,Summer,24
----

.Create `Person` nodes on all constituents, drawing data from friends.csv 
[source, cypher, test-skip]
----
UNWIND graph.names() AS graphName
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///friends.csv' AS line
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  WITH line
  CREATE (:Person {name: line[1], age: toInteger(line[2])})
} IN TRANSACTIONS
----

.Remove all nodes from all constituents
[source, cypher, test-skip]
----
UNWIND graph.names() AS graphName
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  MATCH (n)
  RETURN id(n) AS id
}
CALL {
  USE graph.byName( graphName )
  WITH id
  MATCH (n)
  WHERE id(n) = id
  DETACH DELETE n
} IN TRANSACTIONS
----

The two examples demonstrate another useful feature of `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS`.
Even though composite databases allow accessing multiple graphs in a single query, only one graph can be modified in a single transaction.
`CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` offers a way of constructing queries which modify multiple graphs.

> [NOTE]

Author: @stefano-ottolenghi @rsill-neo4j What do you think abut this note? Is it a reasonable way how to tell the users about known issues?

Reviewer 2: i'm ok with that

====
There is currently a known issue.

> When an error occurs during CALL In Transaction processing, the error message includes information about how many transactions have been committed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an error occurs during `CALL { ... } IN TRANSACTIONS` processing, the error message includes information about how many transactions have been committed.
```
